[Music]
welcome to a new edition of system
update I'm Glenn Greenwald this episode
focuses on the multiple fascinating and
very grave scandals currently engulfing
the bolsa Nara presidency in Brazil
scandals which carry a very substantial
possibility of destroying the Boston REO
government entirely there are multiple
scandals which the Brazilian president
is currently confronting but two in
particular are the most serious the
first of which is the debacle of his
handling of the corona virus pandemic
which is turned into an international
embarrassment in mid-april the
Washington Post noted that while many
world leaders botched their handling of
the corona virus pandemic at the start
bolson ro quote is the worst the
Atlantic in late March proclaimed Boston
ro to be the leader of the coronavirus
denial movement worldwide and a New York
Times news article in early April read
in the headlines that Boston ro is
defiant and isolated as he denies the
seriousness of the corona virus pandemic
bowl scenarios stubborn refusal to
change course the way other leaders have
done and acknowledged the gravity of
this crises has created not only serious
political problems for his presidency in
a country where people now believe that
this virus poses very serious threats
but has also damaged public health in a
very severe way as Brazil despite still
facing a sparse number of tests is now
on the epidemiological curve worse than
some of the countries that confronted
the virus in the most tragic way is
early on including Italy and Spain so it
seems like city and state authorities
and businesses and so on seemed to be
pretty switched on to the risk but the
one person who seemed to be fairly
flippant about it from the start is if
the president all of this is despite not
because of the president tired
senato from the very beginning he's
dismissed this disease calling it a
little sniffle and going out in public
right after the social distancing
guidelines were introduced over the past
few weeks he has taken to social media
and national television to slam social
distancing guidelines saying that it's
ruining Brazil's economy and urging
local governments to abandon their
strategies of closing schools and
businesses he calls those strategies
scorched earth he's blamed the media for
spreading hysteria at the same time that
his handling of the corona virus
pandemic has become a domestic and an
international disgrace Boston ro in what
might be a crisis even more threatening
now faces a very serious corruption and
criminality scandal it's been the case
since the very first days of the Boston
area presidency in early 2019 that
investigations involving suspected
corruption and criminality on the part
of his sons posed a threat to the Boston
area presidency but that threat severely
escalated earlier this week when Boston
arose once beloved justice minister
Sergio Moro who led the world renowned
anti-corruption probe that among other
things resulted in former president Lula
da Silva being imprisoned at a time when
he led all presidential polls in 2017
has left the government in a very
dramatic way he announced over the
weekend that he was resigning held a
press conference and accused president
Bolton ro a very grave corruption
specifically trying to fire the head of
the Federal Police for corrupt motives
at exactly the time that the Brazilian
press was reporting that the federal
police was closing in on several
criminal cases involving Bolson ro sons
the big problem with making this
exchange is that first there would be a
violation of a promise by President
Boston ro that was made initially then I
would have carte blanche secondly there
would be no cause for this replacement
it would be clear that there is
political interference in the federal
police
I still looked for an alternative
solution to try to avoid a political
crisis during a pandemic I think the
focus should be on fighting that
pandemic but I understood that I could
not put aside my commitment to the rule
of long shangela the president really
wants me out of office he doesn't want
me in this post and in carrying out his
dismissal of the director of the Federal
Police I don't see much justification to
stay I'm going to start packing my
things and I'm going to arrange my
resignation letters here and the fact
that it's now Sergio Moro the monster
created by the Boston area movement who
they turned into the icon and High
Priest of ethics and probity and Law &
Order who has now become the principal
accuser of President Paulson ro has
created enormous political problems for
him that are unprecedented in the
roughly 18 months that he's govern
Brazil while these two enormous crises
are taking place the corona virus
pandemic as well as the criminal and
corruption scandal arising out of morose
accusations there are multiple other
crises swirling around the president to
begin with the Brazilian reality
Brazilian currency has collapsed to an
all-time low
against both the US dollar and the euro
the Brazilian stock market is bottoming
out and on top of all of that the
economic growth which Brazilians were
promised when balsan ro trumpeted the
appointment of his new economics
minister in early 2019 Paulo Geddes who
was trained at the University of Chicago
who admires the austerity measures of
Chile's Augusto Pinochet that helped the
oligarchical class at the expense of the
vast majority of the country's poor none
of that economic growth has materialized
quite the contrary
Brazil remained stagnant economically if
not now experiencing economic growth at
the same time that unemployment
unemployment is exploding so the
economic picture is as grim for both
scenario as the political picture the
criminal and corruption picture and the
corona virus pandemic are and it's
happening all at this
time now to really understand the full
context of what's happening in Brazil
it's necessary to understand the
political and historical context for the
country Brazil is no matter what you
think of it an extraordinarily important
nation for the entire world to begin
with it is the sixth most populous
country on the planet it is the largest
country and the largest democracy in
Latin America by far the most
influential country in that on that
continent it possesses vast oil reserves
including pre-sell reserves which have
become increasingly valuable as the
world's oil supply is depleted and it's
in control of the vast majority of the
single most important environmental
asset to avert climate catastrophe which
is the Amazon Brazil's history is
extremely important for understanding
the current crisis as well during the
Cold War in the 1950s 1960s Brazil tried
very hard to stay out of the crosshairs
of both the United States and the Soviet
Union trying to be the puppet of neither
side they were building their own
independent democracy that had the
potential to spawn liberal democracy
throughout the region of Latin America
which never had it a 1946 Constitution
had become a model around the world for
how a developing country could implement
the values of liberal democracy and
throughout the 50s and 60s its democracy
blossomed and all of that came crashing
down when in 1961 Brazilians elected a
ticket of a center-right president and a
center-left
vice president and in 1962 the
center-right president resigned which
elevated the center left president xu
olga lurked to the presidency he was no
communist he really wasn't even a
socialist he was simply a center-left
reformist but his reforms such as modest
land reform and rent controls infuriated
the kennedy administration which feared
that brazil under the center-left
democratically elected government was
moving closer to moscow they first try
cajoling and pressuring and threatening
the Brazilian government to become more
hospitable to free-market policies that
Washington insisted on especially in its
own backyard and when that failed the
United States worked with Brazilian
generals to overthrow in a military coup
the goal art presidency and instituted
what became a 21 year very brutal
military dictatorship a right-wing
military dictatorship supported by both
the US and the UK they trained the
Brazilian generals now in charge of
Brazil in an unelected manner in the
arts of torture imprisoning and even
killing dissidents and shutting down all
institutions including the Congress and
the courts that could have opposed them
for 21 years Brazil lived through a very
dark period under military rule
supported by the US and UK because the
u.s. simply couldn't withstand a
center-left government in the biggest
country in Latin America even though it
was democratically elected so Brazilian
democracy for more than two decades was
destroyed and part of that military
dictatorship included a young army
captain named Shire ball scenario Brazil
wanted to Ma critize read them op er ty
so 1985 and then had its first direct
presidential elections in 1989 had
adopted as essentially a cultural taboo
any attempts to apologize for the crimes
of the military dictatorship let alone
to praise dictatorship as a superior
form of government in fact apologising
for the dictatorship is a criminal
offense in Brazil and yet it's one that
the young army captain shyer Bolton ro
routinely violated from the start he ran
for City Council in Rio de Janeiro on a
put on a platform of raising salaries
for soldiers and defending the police
when they killed innocent people and
quickly elevated himself to the federal
Congress based on a far-right one order
Pro military platform and for the next
30 years a year Bolton ro continued to
praise the military dictatorship as a
superior form of government than
democracy he praised the torturers who
in
the most brutal interrogation methods on
dissidents in 2010 Brazil elected its
first female president the center-left
Dilma Rouseff of the Workers Party
founded by Lula da Silva and DOMA
herself had become a rebel a guerrilla
against the military dictatorship and
was brutally tortured by one of the most
notorious torturers of that regime and
in 2016 when the Congress which then
included congressman Bolton ro voted to
impeach Dilma and one after the next
stood up to explain their vote Bolshoi
air balsa Nardo and his son Eduardo who
was also in the Congress stood up and
praised the dictatorship and
specifically praised the Turk the
Colonel's who had personally tortured
Dilma Rousseff when justifying why they
were voting to impeach her so they've
always been Pro dictator Pro military
rule and anti democracy and that was the
context of the 2018 election and that's
the reason that Brazilian democracy
despite experiencing all kinds of
turbulent events such as impeachments
and crises and corruption scandals has
remained a fairly stable democracy since
it read democratized thirty five years
ago has never been more impaired 'old
than it is today
bole senora's handling of the corona
virus pandemic has been remarkable even
when set against the behavior of the
leaders who have handled it most poorly
there were many leaders early on
including Donald Trump of the United
States Boris Johnson in the UK and other
leaders in Europe and Asia who minimized
the threat of the virus but after
February when they saw the gravity of
what this virus really was the
contagiousness that it possessed the
lethality of the virus for large sectors
of the population radically changed
course and began advocating for
isolation began speaking the virus and a
much more serious manner bolson auro has
stood alone in continuing to refuse to
do so to this very day he minimizes the
public health dangers posed by the virus
emphasizes the need for Brazil to get
back to work and constantly mocks the
seriousness of the disease
as many of you may recall in March bol
Senora
with a large entourage visited Donald
Trump at a state visit in Merrell ago
and when bolson are returned with an
entourage of almost two dozen aides it
quickly was discovered that virtually
all of them tested positive for the
corona virus leading to suspicions that
obviously Boston ro who has been around
them who flew at them must have it as
well
and yet bolson ro proclaimed on social
media that his test was negative he
twice proclaimed that he tested negative
and yet he has refused to this very day
despite numerous requests to show that
test it is even more suspicious given
the fact that Fox News reported in late
March that bolson ro tested positive for
corona virus and the reason Fox News
reported that was because Boston ro son
the congressman Eduardo Boston ro told
Fox News that his father's test had come
back and was positive this has obviously
led to suspicions that bolson ro was
lying when he said that he tested
negative and the reason this is so
important is not just because the public
has a right to know about the health of
its elected leaders nor because lying to
the public about a serious matter is an
important aspect for the public to know
but also because Boston ro in order to
highlight what he believes to be the
lack of seriousness of the disease
repeatedly left the quarantine that
doctors had suggested he voluntarily
undertake in order to leave the
presidential palace and go greet
hundreds of supporters to go out into
Brasilia the nation's capital to markets
and supermarkets and shopping malls in
order to mingle with large crowds of
people and obviously if he was in fact
infected with the virus as he did that
it's almost certain that he passed the
virus to dozens potentially hundreds of
people and only now has a large
center-right newspaper in Brazil estadao
obtained a court ruling that ball Cynara
was required within 48 hours to show
the actual exams on the grounds that the
public has the right to know but all of
that behavior going out into crowds
mocking the virus is nothing more than a
little flu or a cold telling people who
are under sixty that they have nothing
to worry about
created a very serious scandal and
paralyzed the country's ability to
manage the pandemic all at the same time
bowls Nardo's Health Minister who he
chose and who was a political ally but
also a medical doctor had been following
science and giving daily press briefings
in which he was contradicting Boston ro
virtually on a daily basis urging the
country to remain in quarantine and
isolation to socially distance to
emphasize that the virus is very lethal
and very dangerous and most importantly
of all warning the country that the
cures that bolsa Nora was touting were
wildly unproven and offered no
scientific hope because no studies had
demonstrated their efficacy those daily
briefings caused this Minister Mandela
to skyrocket in popularity at exactly
the same time that ball sonars
popularity was plummeting and as a
result of that popularity increasing as
a result of his continuous contradiction
to contradicting of Wilson ro because he
was following the science as a medical
doctor
Boston ro two weeks ago fired his
popular Health Minister which only
worsened his political problems even
further and made the country even less
capable of handling the pandemic even
before this pandemic Brazil's public
health care system was virtually
dysfunctional people who have heart
attacks or strokes often wait hours if
not longer in waiting rooms of emergency
rooms and often die without ever even
being treated that's the public health
system in Brazil prior to the pandemic
needless to say the ability of hospitals
public hospitals to manage a pandemic of
this sort that is spreading especially
throughout very dense poor favelas in
large cities such as San Paulo and Rio
de Janeiro states in the northern part
of Brazil including the capital city
about the
manouse Arne Alan collapse in terms of
their healthcare system we're seeing
mass graves all of this is really
creating a grave public health problem
for Brazil that is yet to reach the
epidemiological peak of this virus some
studies show that Brazil is under
counting by at least seven times the
number of confirmed cases and the number
of fatalities due to Cova 19 because of
the lack of tests they only count
confirmed cases and deaths when the test
comes back positive it takes two weeks
for the tests to come back oftentimes
people die before they're even tested
the official numbers dramatically are
under Counting the real numbers and yet
even the official numbers are starting
to put Brazil not just on the Italy in
Spain and United States curb but worse
than that and the country is realizing
that weeks and weeks of messaging from
Boston are oh that this is nothing more
than a flu that it's just a little cold
his behavior and going out into the
public even while he was likely infected
encouraging other people to do so has
really placed hundreds of millions of
people in Brazil the 220 million people
who live in this country in very severe
danger the crises that exploded this
week in terms of corruption and
criminality on the part of Boston are
OHS family has obviously exacerbated
Bowl scenarios very tenuous political
standing in fact it knocked the corona
virus pandemic off the front pages for
days even as Brazil was finally arriving
at the high end of the curve over the
weekend Sergio Moro bolson arroz justice
minister announced that he was quitting
and when he announced he was quitting he
convened a press conference and lobbed
very serious accusations at president
Paulson ro specifically accusing him of
trying to interfere in ongoing criminal
investigations many of which are aimed
at Boston are as close political allies
and his sons in even Bowl scenario
himself some of the most serious
scandals involve his senator son Flavio
bowls narrow his eldest son
who has long been a member of the Rio de
Janeiro state legislature and then was
elected along with vole senarios
presidential bid in 2018 to the Federal
Senate in March of 2018 as many of you
probably recall the african-american
LGBT City Councilwoman who was raised in
one of Rio de Janeiro's largest favelas
Mariela Franco was brutally assassinated
on the streets of Rio de Janeiro at 9:30
at night
despite the music and dancing this is
not a happy occasion
protesters ran the streets of Sao Paulo
to mourn the murder of a prominent
politician once described as a tireless
social warrior the biggest marchers were
in her hometown of Rio de Janeiro where
tens of thousands of Brazilians gathered
outside the city's council this is the
woman who's killing has provoked such
outrage Marielle Franco the 38 year old
councillor has become a voice for gay
and black rights as well as fighting
against police violence in poor areas of
the city police officials say she was
deliberately targeted Franco was shot
four times in the head and her driver
was also killed her assistant who was
sitting in the back survived
Mariela Franco was in the middle of
working on all kinds of investigations
involving police abuse and denouncing
the growing influence of paramilitary
gangs here in Brazil which are gangs
composed of former police officers and
military officials and current police
and military agents as well who ruled
Brazil's largest cities by force and
make enormous amounts of money they're
essentially mafias that operate along
the same lines as mafias but are even
more dangerous because they're agents of
the state or former agents of the state
with huge amounts of weaponry and
training from the state it was quickly
assumed and then determined by the
police investigating mari Ellie's murder
that the way in which her murder was
carried out with such skill was such a
depth Ness could mean that there was
only a small number of militias composed
of former police officers who possibly
could have killed her because
only former police officers understand
how to carry out a murderer with that
degree of precision and that degree of
skill and finally a year later two
police officers former police officers
were arrested for being the killers one
who was driving the car the other for
being the actual shooter and there were
immediately all sorts of connections
between those killers on the one hand
and the Boston area family on the other
to begin with the killer of Mariela
lived in Shire Boston arose private
condominium unit his gated community
which for a sprawling city like Rio de
Janeiro is an amazing coincidence photos
surfaced of Wilson ro and his family
members with those militia members who
actually pulled the trigger and did the
driving it turned out that bolsa Neuros
youngest son dated the daughter of one
of the two people arrested for Mary
Ellis murder all kinds of connections
between the Boston ro family and the
killers who carried out that murder but
by far the scandal the scandals most
serious component was revealed shortly
after Ballston ro was inaugurated in
2019 when it turned out that the Federal
Police are working in conjunction with
the Rio de Janeiro City police
discovered the specific militia that had
carried out that murder for hire it's
called the crime office and it's
notorious for being one of the most
skilled and effective murder-for-hire
militias in all of Brazil and when the
police raided the top six leaders of
that militia of that crime office the
leader himself ended up being able to
escape and became a fugitive and it was
discovered that Flavio Bolton ro/di
airball senarios oldest son for a decade
employed in his cabinet in the Rio de
Janeiro state legislature the wife and
the mother of the leader of that militia
that murdered Mariela on top of all of
that federal prosecutors in Rio de
Janeiro had discovered enormous amounts
of evidence proving all kinds of money
laundering schemes and kickback schemes
we're Flavio balsa Nara would employ
dozens of people in his cabinet in the
state legislature but none of them would
actually work they were phantom
employees they would keep 10% of their
salary and kick back 90 or 80 percent of
their salary to Flavio bolson ro and all
of that was coordinated by a close aide
of Flavio balsa Naro a close friend of
Shire balsan ro who disappeared and has
been linked to Rio de Janeiro's most
dangerous militia so this investigation
has been closing in on Jai airball
senarios oldest son Flavio for the last
18 months and reports word that the
Federal Police were very close to
finally proving that Flavio Ballston ro
has corrupt links to these militias and
was engaged in illegal practices
involving money laundering and these
salaries at the same time the bolsa Nara
movement has been using a very notorious
and very vicious and criminal fake news
ring against any critics or enemies of
the ball Sonora movement in the ball
Sonora government and by a fake news
ring I don't just mean tweets and posts
with false claims about people I mean
fabricated documents forged materials
designed to purport to be genuine
conversations between well-known
politicians and journalists it was used
against me when I was reporting on the
corruption on the part of Sergio Mora
when it's been used against numerous
other people and it's long been
suspected that what is now called the
cabinet of hate is overseen and managed
by President Paul senarios other son
Carlos Wilson who has been a longtime
City Councilman in Rio de Janeiro who
worked directly with the balsan ro
campaign in their communications network
that was very successful in spreading
fake news and now overseas president
ball senarios political and
communications operations and this fake
news ring as I said doesn't just publish
false allegations against people but
uses forgery and fabrication and the
armies of robots in order to smear and
destroy people's reputations and is a
criminal offence in Brazil it's been
investigated by the Federal Police
and two weeks ago reports began to
emerge in the Brazilian media that the
federal police were close to arresting
Carlos paulsen ro for being the
mastermind of this fake news operation
something that has long been suspected
and is now being proven and it's in that
context with the federal police closing
in on two of his sons not for minor
crimes but for very grave crimes
including the family's links to the most
dangerous and criminal paramilitary
gangs in Brazil including the one that
assassinated Mariela Franco not just
using violence but all kinds of money
laundering and kickback schemes to
enrich themselves did Bolton ro after
first trying to replace the head of Rio
de Janeiro's federal police force back
six months ago now is trying to fire the
head of the federal police and that is
what caused Sergio Moro to resign in
protest and to accuse Ballston ro of
corruption in part because Sergio Mora
likely wants to run against Bolton ro in
2022 and had to separate at some point
and with ball Sinatra's popularity
collapsing due to all of these crises
figured now is a good time to do so it
was also a power struggle over who would
control the federal police when Sergio
Mora joined the government he was
promised he would be able to and he
viewed this as a betrayal of himself but
also he didn't want to be associated
with this corrupt attempt to protect the
criminality and corruption of bolson
Aras family and balsan are his sons so
we didn't just quit but he blew the
whistle on everything bole Cynara was
doing as a result of Mauro doing that
there is now a full-scale war between
supporters of Sergio Moro on the one
hand and the Bolton are a movement on
the other Sergio Mauro has become the
primary target of the hate mob and the
fake news network over the internet
something remarkable to see since I had
been the target of that and others had
been the target of that when we were
reporting on and investigating and
denouncing Sergio Moro himself he never
cared about it before but now he's
denouncing it but this war between
Sergio Moro and his followers on the one
hand and Jai air both snarl and his
followers on the
has created by far the biggest problem
yet for president Paulson ro just this
week based on those allegations voiced
by Sergio Moro the Supreme Court of
Brazil authorized the opening of a
criminal investigation to determine
whether president Boston ro committed
crimes and trying to interfere an
ongoing criminal investigations
impeachment which had been something
advocated by a small minority of members
of Congress on the left is now a
mainstream idea being talked about by
numerous members of Congress and major
media figures including members of
President Ball senarios former party the
party line on which he was elected
before he left that party and anger
about a year ago the former center-right
president of Brazil the highly respected
among the bourgeoisie Fernando Henrique
Cardoso himself has come out and said
that bowl scenario should resign and if
he doesn't he should be impeached the
only question is what the Brazilian
military is thinking Boston ah Rose vice
president currently is a general in the
Brazilian military if he were to resign
or if he were impeached it would mean
that the military would be back in
control of Brazilian democracy for the
first time since it read democratize
back in 1985 so it's a very grave
measure to consider with very serious
repercussions but whatever else is true
it's starting to appear extremely
unlikely that's a year bolson era we'll
be able to complete the four-year term
to which he was elected in 2018 as this
virus spreads throughout favelas as the
death toll mounts as the economy
continues to collapse and as there are
more and more probes into the
criminality the serious criminality of
jire Bolson arose son of his movement
and he himself it is very difficult to
envision how we will be able to survive
this political crisis short of ending
Brazilian democracy short of a military
coup and not right now is why the
country everyone would agree as a
consensus is at a crossroad between
whether it will continue
was an actual vibrant democracy what
seems impossible with dire Boston are
clinging to power or whether there will
be anti-democratic measures invoked in
order to protect Boston ro from things
like impeachment and increasing pressure
to resign as his popularity plummet in
one sense it's a very sad day for Brazil
which has always been a country filled
with incredible people a very vibrant
and rich culture some of the most
beautiful diversity of any country on
the earth not superficial diversity but
very substantive and profound diversity
it's a country that has had its
potential stymied for decades by very
severe economic and wealth inequality it
looked for the first time under
President Lula when it was experienced
economic growth when social programs had
been implemented to let millions and
millions of people out of poverty that
Brazil could finally realize its full
potential and yet corruption scandals an
impeachment crisis in 2016
economic crises of a very severe kind
and now all of the problems assured in
by bowls tomorrow's election have put
the country further back on that course
then it's been probably since free
democratization but at the same time
where there's chaos and where there's
confusion and where there's conflict
there also can be opportunity for the
population to finally unite in defense
of these democratic values that are now
under assault by a very fanatical very
extreme and increasingly unhinged and
irrational
political movement that continues to
remain deeply loyal to the Brazilian
president thank you very much for
listening to this latest episode if you
like these episodes you can subscribe to
the intercepts YouTube channel that has
not just our weekly show and sometimes
it's more than our weekly show but also
several other shows that are producing
very compelling political and cultural
content so subscribe to the youtubes
intercept channel and thank you very
much for watching